Therapy is conversation with a purpose. The purpose is to discover and change the psycho-behavioral structures, processes, and habits that maintain the client’s problem. But how may conversation accomplish these ends? Therapists use language in several common ways: to explain the rationale for a given intervention (e.g., how exposure works); to instruct the client in practicing a new behavioral or social skill (“look me in the eye and shake my hand firmly”); to direct the client’s attention to a certain aspect of their experience (“what are you feeling right now?”); to prompt them to share information (“tell me more about your relations with your mother”); and to reflect the client’s concerns (“so, what I hear you saying is that your boyfriend’s drinking is upsetting you”) so as to convey empathy and attention, and so on. But all these uses are general strategies of communication, deployed in multiple contexts beside therapy. They do not distinguish the therapy encounter from other social or professional conversations. So, are there ways of using language that are more unique to therapy? Indeed.The first and perhaps most famous of these strategies was popularized by the grandfather of talk therapy, Sigmund Freud. Freud argued that unconscious material—psychic truths—might be unearthed through the process of free association: the client’s freeform narration of their inner landscape. In Freud’s system, the analyst is supposed to then interpret the themes and symbols embedded in the client’s raw monologue in order to excavate and map out the client’s latent motives and conflicts.The ability to discern such hidden meanings in language demands a certain kind of listening, an attentiveness to the beat pulsating under the music, the metaphorical resonance of words and images, and the therapist’s own reactions--in other words, it requires listening with what the psychoanalyst Theodor Reik famously called, "the third ear. A spectacular example of this kind of listening, from Theodor Reik himself, concerns his story of a female patient grieving the end of her affair with a man who decided not to leave his wife for her. During one session, the woman fell silent for a long while. Then, Reik reports: “After many minutes she complained about a toothache. She told me that she had been to the dentist yesterday. He had given her an injection and then had pulled a wisdom tooth. The spot was hurting again. New and longer silence. She pointed to my bookcase in the corner and said, 'There's a book standing on its head.' Without the slightest hesitation and in reproachful voice I said, 'But why did you not tell me that you had an abortion?’”
The humanist psychologist Carl Rogers had other ideas about language in therapy. Rogers believed in the primacy of experience as a tool for learning and change, and he recognized the limitations of words to capture and convey experience. He said, “…the real meaning of a word can never be expressed in words, because the real meaning would be the thing itself. If one wishes to give such a real meaning he should put his hand over his mouth and point.”
